feat: rework IPAM documentation (#10135)
opsmill/infrahub: docs/docs/ipam/query-ipam-data.mdx

---
title: Query IPAM data
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

> Read the computed values on IP prefixes and addresses, or walk the hierarchy tree. Use these patterns for reporting, automation, or verification.

Reviewer: **Content dropped — mutations.** The deleted `building-your-schema.mdx:34-49` listed the generated mutations: `IpamIPPrefixCreate`/`Update`/`Upsert`/`Delete` and the `IpamIPAddress` equivalents.

Across the new set this page covers reads and `allocate-ips-and-prefixes.mdx` covers pool allocation — nothing documents creating, updating, or deleting a prefix or address directly. That's the most basic write path in the feature, and it now has no home.

The suggestion below only fixes "walk" (figurative — see the voice rule); the mutations gap needs a new section, either here or back on `build-your-ipam-schema.mdx`.

```suggestion
Read the computed values on IP prefixes and addresses, or follow the hierarchy relationships. Use these patterns for reporting, automation, or verification.
```

```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Query an address's computed values

`IpamIPAddress` has no equivalent sibling attributes — instead, the `address` attribute itself (kind `IPHost`) exposes computed sub-fields: `ip`, `netmask`, `hostmask`, `prefixlen`, and `version`.

<Tabs groupId="method" queryString>
  <TabItem value="graphql" label="GraphQL" default>

```graphql
query {
  IpamIPAddress(address__value: "192.0.2.10/24") {
    edges {
      node {
        address {
          value
          ip
          netmask
          hostmask
          prefixlen
          version
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

</TabItem>

  <TabItem value="sdk" label="Python SDK">

```python
address = await client.get(kind="IpamIPAddress", address__value="192.0.2.10/24")
value = address.address.value  # an ipaddress.IPv4Interface or IPv6Interface
print(value.ip, value.netmask, value.hostmask, value.version)
```

The Python SDK maps an `IPHost` attribute's value to the standard library's `ipaddress.IPv4Interface` or `IPv6Interface` — `netmask` and `hostmask` come from that object, not from a separate attribute.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Navigate the hierarchy

> IP prefixes expose `parent`, `children`, `ancestors`, and `descendants` relationships. They are read-only, Infrahub manages them automatically.

Reviewer: Comma splice. The claim itself is correct and matches what the deleted page said about hierarchy relationships not being usable in mutations.

```suggestion
IP prefixes expose `parent`, `children`, `ancestors`, and `descendants` relationships. They are read-only — Infrahub manages them automatically.
```
